
# Chapter 2 - Background

## History of Electricity Markets

The electric utility industry was first founded in 1879, and has been subject to many municipal, state and federal regulation since then. The electric utilities are considered "natural monopolies" because the efficiency in production would be higher when a single firm supplies the entire market [1]. In 1935 the United States congress passed a law to regulate the electric utilities at the state level. The Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) [2] enforced state regulation making the utility companies incorporate in the same state they were operating in. They also owned the monopoly of that market and were forced to set prices based on the "fair rate of return" [3]. Then, from 1940s to the 1960s, the electric industry grew rapidly because of demand in energy usage. The increase in usage created environmental concerns as well as concerns over dependency on foreign oil. The need for regulation to limit emissions and to reduce oil usage led to the 1978 Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act (PURPA) [4]. The law was designed to promote the adoption of renewable resources and efficient generation [2]. 

The most interesting component of the incoming regulation, was that it also forced utilities to buy power from independent companies that could produce power for less than what it would have cost the utility to generate the power, called "avoided cost", promoting competition into the power generation business [5]. A new class of exempt wholesale generators prompted the expansion of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to initiate open transmission access. The independent generators could now dive deeper into renewable generation across the country. By the 1990s the most prominent initiative was in the California Power Exchange (PX), a regional spot market for buyers and sellers to trade electricity. [6] The California ISO was started in 1990 and was designed to operate the state’s power transmission grid and provide open access to all qualified users [7]. Even with competition in the market the PX prices remained high because of collusion by power producers and power brokers. Order 888 by FERC was passed to introduce competition at a wholesale level, but the market had fluctuating prices and resulted in an energy crisis [8]. Manipulation of the market by nefarious companies such as Enron, led to stricter regulation around how the market should operate. The requirements for the market to be more flexible and capable of integrating renewables is also an inevitable challenge [9].

## The Smart Grid
“The grid” refers to the electric grid that consists of a network of transmission lines, substations, transformers, etc. which transfer the electricity from the power plant to the home or business [10]. The average age of power plants in north America is 35 years old. Also, more than half of the electricity in north America is generated through coal and the delivery efficiency of electricity is an abysmal 35%. Finally, frequent and major blackouts in the past indicate critical vulnerabilities in the electrical infrastructure [11].The challenges of creating a more efficient grid led to the adoption of smart management systems that can intelligently integrate the actions of all users connected to it, including generators, consumers and those that do both in order to efficiently deliver sustainable, economic and secure electricity supplies. The result is a "Smart grid", an advanced power system that integrates the electrical network with smart digital communication technology. Providing bi-directional communication between the utility and consumers, leveraging smart sensors across the system [11].

Conventional electric power systems in most countries have been designed so that a central power station produces electrical power. Then transformers increase the voltage to high levels which are suitable for transmission. Once the energy arrives at a community the voltage is gradually stepped down to lower levels into the distribution network until it is finally dropped into the consumer’s premise. The energy is then measured by a meter that keeps record of the energy consumption in real-time [12]. The flow of electricity was traditionally uni-directional but in the age of distributed generation the grid must also deal with bi-directional flow back to the grid from producers who used to just be customers.

The Smart Grid must grow to incorporate the bi-directional flow of electricity between supply and demand sources as penetration of Plug-in Electric Vehicles (PEVs) and distributed energy resources (DERs) like Photo-voltaic Solar Panels, (PV) increases in residential sectors. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) [13] was designed to address the smart grid transition improving in the following areas :

- Reliability – the reliability of grid will be improved by several factors including less disturbances and blackouts.
- Economics – by reducing the electricity rates and creating new jobs and enhancing the U.S. gross domestic product
- Efficiency – by reducing the costs associated with generation, transmission and distribution of the electricity
- Environmental – by reducing the number of emissions by increasing the integration of renewable resources.
- Security – by reducing the probability of manmade attacks and natural disasters.
- Safety – by reducing the consequences of any grid-related events

The reliability, economics and efficiency of the grid will improve as communication technologies transition into advanced implementations of hardened sensor networks across the grid known as the industrial internet of things (IIoT) [14]. The IIoT improvements to the grid can affect the energy generation efficiency, demand side management and even the transmission and distribution of energy for energy carriers. The more data the grid provides in real-time allows for optimization leading to greater reliability and efficiency, reducing the cost of electricity [15].

The environmental, safety, and security aspects of the grid will improve as the adoption of distributed generation and energy storage improves. DG systems are typically renewable as roof-top solar (PV) . The environmental benefits of renewables in the short term are attractive but there is still an environmental cost to create PV technology. The distribution of generation and adoption of microgrids could decentralize the security risk of the current grid improving its overall-reliability and increasing resiliency. The overall challenges of the smart grid are many, but driving technological trends seem to point to a redesign of the infrastructure and the market structure that operates it. The increase of DG and renewables with the increase of retail electric prices and the decreasing of profitable incentive tariff rates are all challenges for the grid. [16]

## Residential Roof-top Solar

In recent years, there has been an urgent pursuit of an alternative energy system in which energy production, transmission, distribution, and consumption can take place in an environmentally sustainable fashion. As a result, the development of smart, sustainable, and green solutions is becoming more significant, including the widespread deployment of distributed energy resources (DERs) at residences [17], the introduction of electric vehicles (EVs), and the establishment of various smart energy services, e.g., demand response management, for the effective management of energy resources within the electricity grid. DERs such as rooftop photovoltaic (PV) systems and energy storage systems promise to alter the electric grid by decarbonizing and decentralizing energy services. The end users of energy are no longer just consumers of energy but also producers, leading to a new term , "prosumers". DERs are becoming more affordable for the average home owner and products such as Tesla's Powerwall and Solar Roof make it likely that adoption of these technologies will continue to grow.[18] In addition to commercial adoption, political policies are now in place to push adoption of these technologies to aid in reduction of dependencies on fossil fuels. 

## Net Metering

Net Energy Metering (NEM) is a compensation mechanism to encourage the adoption of residential PV systems, commonly referred to as net metering. It allowed the flow of energy to feedback into the utility grid, forcing the negative pricing of electricity to be paid back to the user [19]. The utility would have excess generation from the home that could compensate for the load of neighbors nearby. NEM encouraged consumers to spend money on PV systems without government subsidies. Prosumers with PV could reduce fossil fuels' need and overall electricity cost to ratepayers. The idea spread gradually in the 1980s. In 1981, the Arizona Corporation Commission approved net metering below 100 kW, the first among US public utility commissions (PUC). The following year, the Massachusetts PUC followed suit. In 1983, Minnesota became the first US state to enact a net metering law. More state PUCs and legislatures followed suit: the Indiana and Rhode Island PUCs in 1985, the Idaho and Texas PUCs in 1986, the Maine PUC in 1987, and the New Mexico and Oklahoma commissions in 1988 [20]. NEM has been widely implemented currently; 41 states, in addition to Washington, DC, American Samoa, US Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico, have mandatory net metering policies. Some utilities have voluntarily offered NEM arrangements to customers, as well. For example, Idaho and Texas do not have compulsory NEM policies, but some utilities in those states do offer NEM [21,22]. Many utilities saw NEM break the business model and often lobby against the payback at retail prices because it does not include the transmission losses and operating costs taken on the utility. Despite the benefits of NEM, it can also be seen as a form of “cost-shifting” or subsidy for those who invest in renewables, while others who are unable to invest in it take the cost burden [23,24]. In conclusion, prosumers benefit from NEM, and utilities are forced to implement NEM by Public Commissions in varying states. The retail price of electricity is not ideal as a payback price for the utilities and forces them to lobby to make it more difficult for PV adoption.


## Peer-to-Peer Energy Market

The typical peer-to-peer (P2P) market consists of a physical layer, and a virtual layer. The physical layer is the infrastructure that facilitates the generation and metering of energy for the prosumer network. A prosumer has a form of energy generation system with an inverter that converts or steps up the energy to match the homes alternating current (AC) source. The connection to most generation systems is isolated by an isolation switch for emergencies. The entering energy from the DG system immediately supplies the load of the home and any excess energy that flows in the opposite direction (into the grid) is measured by the bi-directional meter installed at the utilities distribution drop. A micro-controller with wireless connectivity, can relay the meter flow over a wireless communication backhaul to other controllers [25]. The virtual layer consists of the software that facilitates interactions between participants in the market. It ensures that all participants have equal access to the platform historical financial transactions. The virtual layer consists of the messaging protocol and other transmission of the messages securely to a message broker or a distributed ledger for settlement and trading transactions [26]. 

### P2P Energy Market Types
Full-P2P configurations are suitable for isolated communities where the maintenance of all the infrastructure is maintained through self-forming coalitions. In a fully decentralized market, the bilateral contracts capture both the upstream-downstream energy balance as well as forward market uncertainty [27]. To facilitate privacy and fairness systems such as blockchain based credits are used as a distributed ledger accounting. In a Community-P2P a community manager is chosen to take care of the privacy and fairness. The members of the community share common interests and goals even though they are not at the same location [28] may work either in a collaborative or competitive manner [29]. Participants generally trade energy through a community manager that manages exchanges outside of the community [30]. Finally, a Hybrid-P2P would leverage the best of both worlds and even create a hierarchal approach to stacking several Full-P2P configurations and managed at a larger scale by a Community-P2P commission [31,32]. 

### Existing P2P Energy Markets

Microgrids are known as low voltage grids, which are used to supply electricity to communities that can be operated in an islanding and grid connected mode. Microgrids can have dispatchable energy resources (DERs) and gain an advantage to continuing to operate in the islanding and grid connected mode [33]. The DERs are managed by prosumers in a microgrid and can sell energy back to the grid with a benefit from the Grid. The LO3 blockchain platform has been developed as a community energy market project [34]. The members can buy and sell energy from each other with smart contracts. The Brooklyn Microgrid, project used the platform to setup the virtual layer of the market as they connected the physical layer [35]. The Brooklyn Microgrid was an apartment building in New York retrofitted with roof top solar. The residents where all consumers contributing to the generation and consumption of the microgrid. The microgrid was able to be islanded off the main power grid and service the residents in a sustainable way. It was one of the few successful pilots in north America. Unfortunately, this project has yet to create a wave of adoption across the country. In other countries efforts around energy trading platforms have yielded varying configurations and services. The German platforms such as Enerchain and Sonnen charge monthly participation fees but provide blockchain based networks that protect privacy [36]. Many other European solutions established pilots or flat fee participation on a platform [37]. 

## Cooperative Game Theory

Auction games have been proposed for trading both storage space and renewable energy from DERs [38]. The real-time implementation of a multiagent-based game-theoretic reverse auction model for microgrid market operations featuring conventional and renewable DERs is discussed. [39] The proposed methodology was realistically implemented in a smart grid system at Florida International University, and the subsequent investigation shows that the proposed algorithm and the industrial hardware-based infrastructure are suitable for implementation in the existing electric utility grid. Meanwhile, the authors in [40] utilize an auction game to study the solution of joint-energy-storage ownership sharing between multiple shared facility controllers (SFCs) and those dwelling in a residential community. The auction process possesses both incentive-compatibility and individual-rationality properties and is also capable of enabling the residential units (RUs) to decide the fraction of their shared energy storage capacity with the SFCs of the community to assist in storing electricity. For example, in [41,42] a coalitional game is used to study the cooperation between small-scale DERs and energy users to enable the direct trading of energy without going through retailers. The asymptotic Shapley value is the core of the coalitional game so that no small-scale DERs or energy users have an incentive to abandon the coalition, which suggests the stable direct trading of energy for the proposed pricing scheme. Furthermore, numerous case studies demonstrate that the scheme is suitable for practical implementation. The authors in [43] design a three-stage algorithm based on a coalitional game strategy and include request, exchange, merge-and-split, and cooperative transaction stages. The developed algorithm enables microgrids to form coalitions where each microgrid can exchange power directly by paying a transmission fee.


# References
1. B.W.F. Depoorter, “Regulation of Natural Monopoly,” Encycl. Law Econ., (published).
2. W. Troesken, “Regime Change and Corruption. A History of Public Utility Regulation”; pp. 259-82 in Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America's Economic History, Edited by E. L. Glaeser, C. Goldin. University of Chicago Press, United States, 2006. 
3. S. Hunt, Making competition work in electricity.Ch.2 p.27 John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2002. 
4. Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978. 1980.
5. M.W. White, “Power Struggles: Explaining Deregulatory Reforms in Electricity Markets,” Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. Microeconomics, 201–267 (1996). doi:10.2307/2534749. 
6. L. Cabral, “The California Energy Crisis,” Japan World Econ., 14-3 335–339 (2002). 
7. K. Mcdermott," Cost of Service Regulation In the Investor-Owned Electric Utility Industry A History of Adaptation," Edison Electric Institute, Washington, DC, June 2012. 
8. P. Joskow and E. Kahn, “A quantitative analysis of pricing behaviour in California’s wholesale electricity market during summer 2000,” Spec. Publ. IEEE Power. Soc., 1 392–394 (2001). 
9. C. Weare, The California Electricity Crisis: Causes and Policy Options. Ch. 3 pp. 1- 119. Public Policy Institute of California, USA, 2003
10. Spandana Vottem, B.S. "APPLICATION OF COOPERATIVE GAME THEORY IN SMART GRIDS", A thesis submitted to the Graduate Council of Texas State University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science with a Major in Engineering December 2019.
11. C. Hicks, "The smart grid - where are we today and what the future holds," ERB Institute, University of Michigan, Michigan 2012.
12. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. “The Power of Change: Innovation for Development and Deployment of Increasingly Clean Electric Power Technologies”, The National Academies Press, Washington D.C., 2016.
13. X. Fang, S. Member, S. Misra, and G. Xue, “Smart Grid – The New and Improved Power Grid : A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, 14 [4] 944–980 (2011).
14. Naser Hossein Motlagh, Mahsa Mohammadrezaei and Julian Hunt and Behnam Zakeri, "Internet of Things (IoT) and the Energy Sector" Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, FI-00560 Helsinki, Finland; Energies 2020.
15. L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of Things in industries: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2233–2243, Nov. 2014.
16. Chenghua Zhang, "Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading in Electrical Distribution Networks," Cardiff University,PHD Thesis, 2017.
17. Nizam, M.; Wicaksono, F.X.R. Design and Optimization of Solar, Wind, and Distributed Energy Resource (DER) Hybrid Power Plant for Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Station in Rural Area. In Proceedings of the 2018 5th International Conference on Electric Vehicular Technology (ICEVT), Surakarta, Indonesia, 30–31 October 2018.
18. S. Patel, R. Rajagopal, Peer to Peer Sharing of Distributed Energy Resources, 14 Sept. 2018
19. D. E. Krasko V., "Strategic Sequencing for State Distributed PV Policies: A Quantitative Analysis of Policy Impacts and Interactions.," National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, 2012.
20. F.-E.-S. Roberto Verzola, Crossing Over: The Energy Transition to Renewable Electricity, Manila Office: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, 2015. 
21. K. P. L. S. O. M.-S. Steve Pociask, "The Unintended Consequences of Net Metering," American Consumer Institute, a nonprofit educational and research organization, Washington, DC, 2019.
22. U. E. I. Administration, "Florida State Energy Profile," US Energy Information Administration, 18 11 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.eia.gov/state/print.php?sid=FL#34. [Accessed 11 12 2021].
23. F. P. S. Commission, "Find Your Utility," Florida Public Service Commission, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.psc.state.fl.us/ConsumerAssistance/FindYourUtility. [Accessed 11 12 2021].
24. EnergySage, "How does Florida Power and Light net metering work?," EnergySage, Inc., 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.energysage.com/local-data/net-metering/fpl/. [Accessed 11 12 2021].
25. X. Y. W. F. C. H. T. R. Q. C. a. J. Z. N. Liu, "Online energy sharing for nano grid clusters: A Lyapunov optimization approach," IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 5, p. 46244636, 2018. 
26. I. EnergySage, "How does Florida Power and Light net metering work?," EnergySage, Inc., 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.energysage.com/local-data/net-metering/fpl/. [Accessed 11 12 2021].
27. T. K. S. C. Y. T. M. M. D. M. H. V. P. K. L. W. W. Tushar, "A motivational game-theoretic approach for peer-to-peer energy trading in smart grid," Applied Energy, vol. 243, pp. 10-20, June 2019.
28. H.-C. L. V. D. A. I. Uribe-Perez Noelia, "State of the Art and Trends Review of Smart Metering in Electricity Grids," Applied Sciences, vol. 6, no. 10.3390, pp. 68-92, 2016. 
29. C. Y. H. M.-R. T. S. H. V. P. ,. K. L. W. W. Tushar, "Transforming Energy Networks Via Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading: The potential of game-theoretic approaches," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 90-111, July 2020. 
30. N. F. S. J. D. M. D. M. T. Morstyn, "Using peer-to-peer energy-trading platforms to incentivize prosumers to form federated power plants," Nature Energy, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 94-101, 2018. 
31. Q. A. J. Ni, "Economic power transaction using coalitional game strategy in micro-grids," IET Generation, Transmision Distribution, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 10-18, 2016. 
32. V. D. M. A. Sakineh Khalili, "Impact of Blockchain Technology on Electric Power Grids - A case study in LO3 
33. Energy," ConnectSmart Research Laboratory, vol. University of Tenesee at Chattanooga, 2020. 
34. Enerchain, "Enerchain® proof of concept," Enerchain, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://enerchain.ponton.de/. [Accessed 2021].
35. Sonnen, "Sonnen," Sonnen, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://sonnengroup.com/sonnencommunity/. [Accessed 2021].
36. S. Vottem, "Application of Cooperative Game Theory in Smart Grids," in Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas., 2019. 
37. Q. A. J. Ni, "Economic power transaction using coalitional game strategy in micro-grids," IET Generation, Transmision Distribution, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 10-18, 2016. 
38. X. Y. W. F. C. H. T. R. Q. C. a. J. Z. N. Liu, "Online energy sharing for nano grid clusters: A Lyapunov optimization approach," IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 5, p. 46244636, 2018. 
39. V. D. M. A. Sakineh Khalili, "Impact of Blockchain Technology on Electric Power Grids - A case study in LO3 Energy," ConnectSmart Research Laboratory, vol. University of Tenesee at Chattanooga, 2020. 
40. W. Tushar, B. Chai, C. Yuen, S. Huang, D. B. Smith, H. V. Poor, and Z. Yang, “Energy storage sharing in smart grid: A modified auction-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1462– 1475, May 2016.
41. M. H. Cintuglu, H. Martin, and O. A. Mohammed, “Real-time implementation of multiagent-based game theory reverse auction model for microgrid market operation,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1064–1072, Mar. 2015
42. W. Tushar, B. Chai, C. Yuen, S. Huang, D. B. Smith, H. V. Poor, and Z. Yang, “Energy storage sharing in smart grid: A modified auction-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1462–1475, May 2016.
43. W. Lee, L. Xiang, R. Schober, and V. W. S. Wong, “Direct electricity trading in smart grid: A coalitional game analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1398–1411, July 2014.
44. J. Ni and Q. Ai, “Economic power transaction using coalitional game strategy in micro-grids,” IET Generation, Transmission Distribution, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 10–18, Jan. 2016.